Add library guide for table provider and catalog providers (#7287)
apache/arrow-datafusion: docs/source/library-user-guide/custom-table-providers.md

  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Custom Table Provider

Like other areas of DataFusion, you extend DataFusion's functionality by implementing a trait. The `TableProvider` and associated traits, have methods that allow you to implement a custom table provider, i.e. use DataFusion's other functionality with your custom data source.

This section will also touch on how to have DataFusion use the new `TableProvider` implementation.

## Table Provider and Scan

the `scan` method on the `TableProvider` is arguably its most important. It returns an execution plan that DataFusion will use as part of the query plan to execute the query.

### Scan

As mentioned, `scan` returns an execution plan, and in particular a `Result<Arc<dyn ExecutionPlan>>`. The core of this is returning something that can be dynamically dispatched to an `ExecutionPlan`. And as per the general DataFusion idea, we'll need to implement it.

> #### Execution Plan

Author: `execution-plans.md` looks like this now:

<img width="927" alt="image" src="https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/assets/421839/5e50fb34-3a0e-4ea0-833f-652fad29da89">

Looking at the [example in this repo][ex], the execute method:

```rust
struct CustomExec {
    db: CustomDataSource,
    projected_schema: SchemaRef,
}

impl ExecutionPlan for CustomExec {
    fn execute(
        &self,
        _partition: usize,
        _context: Arc<TaskContext>,
    ) -> Result<SendableRecordBatchStream> {
        let users: Vec<User> = {
            let db = self.db.inner.lock().unwrap();
            db.data.values().cloned().collect()
        };

        let mut id_array = UInt8Builder::with_capacity(users.len());
        let mut account_array = UInt64Builder::with_capacity(users.len());

        for user in users {
            id_array.append_value(user.id);
            account_array.append_value(user.bank_account);
        }

        Ok(Box::pin(MemoryStream::try_new(
            vec![RecordBatch::try_new(
                self.projected_schema.clone(),
                vec![
                    Arc::new(id_array.finish()),
                    Arc::new(account_array.finish()),
                ],
            )?],
            self.schema(),
            None,
        )?))
    }
}
```

This:

1. Gets the users from the database

> 2. Constructs the individual arrays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Constructs the individual output arrays (columns)
```

3. Returns a `MemoryStream` of a single `RecordBatch` with the arrays

I.e. returns the "physical" data. For other examples, refer to the [`CsvExec`][csv] and [`ParquetExec`][parquet] for more complex implementations.

> With the `ExecutionPlan` implemented, we can now return to the `scan` method of the `TableProvider`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `ExecutionPlan` implemented, we can now implement the `scan` method of the `TableProvider`.
```

let custom_table_provider = CustomDataSource::new();
ctx.register_table("custom_table", Arc::new(custom_table_provider));
```

This will allow you to use the custom table provider in DataFusion. For example, you could use it in a SQL query to get a `DataFrame`.

```rust
let df = ctx.sql("SELECT id, bank_account FROM custom_table")?;
```

## Recap

To recap, in order to implement a custom table provider, you need to:

1. Implement the `TableProvider` trait
2. Implement the `ExecutionPlan` trait
3. Register the `TableProvider` with the `ExecutionContext`

## Next Steps

As mentioned the [csv] and [parquet] implementations are good examples of how to implement a `TableProvider`. The [example in this repo][ex] is a good example of how to implement a `TableProvider` that uses a custom data source.

More abstractly, see the following traits for more information on how to implement a custom `TableProvider` for a file format:

- `FileOpener` - a trait for opening a file and inferring the schema
- `FileFormat` - a trait for reading a file format
- `ListingTableProvider` - a useful trait for implementing a `TableProvider` that lists files in a directory

> [ex]: https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion/blob/a5e86fae3baadbd99f8fd0df83f45fde22f7b0c6/datafusion-examples/examples/custom_datasource.rs#L214C1-L276

Reviewer: Leaving links to the docs.rs versions might be more maintainable

Author: Apologies, not sure how to do this. I tried https://docs.rs/crate/datafusion/latest/source/, but the examples aren't there from what I can tell.
